---
title: Homework 6
shorttitle: Homework 6
notebook: AM207_HW6.ipynb
noline: 1
layout: wiki
---
 
**Harvard University**<br>
**Spring 2018**<br>
**Instructors: Rahul Dave**<br>
**Due Date: ** Friday, March 9th, 2018 at 11:00am

**Instructions:**

- Upload your iPython notebook containing all work to Canvas.

- Structure your notebook and your work to maximize readability.

## Problem 1: Metropolis and Chill

Suppose we ask you to memorize the order of the top five movies on IMDB. When we quiz you on the order afterwards, you might not recall the correct order, but the mistakes you will tend to make in your recall can be modeled by simple probabilistic models.
  
Let's say that the top five movies are:  
1. *The Shawshank Redemption*
2. *The Godfather*
3. *Wonder Woman*
4. *Black Panther*
5. *Pulp Fiction*

Let's represent this ordering by the vector $\omega = (1,2,3,4,5)$. 

If you were to mistakenly recall the top five movies as:
2. *The Godfather*
3. *Wonder Woman*
5. *Pulp Fiction*
4. *Black Panther*
1. *The Shawshank Redemption*

We'd represent your answer by the vector $\theta = (2,3,5,4,1)$.

Now, we have a way of quantifying how wrong your answer can be. We define the Hamming distance between two top five rankings, $\theta, \omega$, as follows:
$$d(\theta, \omega) = \sum_{i=1}^5 \mathbb{I}_{\theta_i\neq \omega_i},$$ 
where $\mathbb{I}_{\theta_i\neq \omega_i}$ is the indicator function that returns 1 if $\theta_i\neq \omega_i$, and 0 otherwise.

For example, the Hamming distance between your answer and the correct answer is $d(\theta, \omega)=4$, because you only ranked *Black Panther* in both answers correctly. 

Finally, let's suppose that the probability of giving a particular answer (expressed as $\theta$) is modeled as
$$ p(\theta \,|\, \omega, \lambda) \propto  e^{-\lambda\, d(\theta,\, \omega)}.$$

### Part A:

Implement an Metropolis algorithm to produce sample guesses from 500 individuals, with various $\lambda$ values, $\lambda=0.2, 0.5, 1.0$. What are the top five possible guesses?

### Part B:
Using the Metropolis algorithm, compute the probability that *The Shawshank Redemption* is ranked as the top movie (ranked number 1) . Compare the resulting probabilities for the various different $\lambda$ values. Summarize your findings.

## Problem 2: Lensed Galaxies via Metropolis-Hastings

You are a renowned observational astronomer working on gravitational lensing and you just got news about a source whose morphology appears distorted, most likely because there is a foreground source (an ensemble of mini black holes for which you know the mass and position) acting as a lens. Your gravitational lensing calculations indicate that the detected flux $F$ from the background source as a function of right ascencion ($x$) and declination ($y$) can be described by a modified Beale's function:

$F(x,y) = \exp\left[-\left(\frac{x^2}{2\sigma_x^2}+\frac{y^2}{2\sigma_y^2}\right)\right] \log (1.0+(1.5-x+xy)^2+(2.25-x+xy^2)^2+(2.625-x+xy^3)^2) $

with $\sigma_x = \sigma_y = \sqrt{10}$

You are interested in observing this source with the Hubble Space Telescope, and you want to simulate beforehand how photons will form the image on the Hubble detector. You realize that a good way to do this is by sampling F(x,y) with a Monte Carlo method.

### Part A:

Using the following asymmetric function as a proposal distribution:

$q(x,y) = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2 \pi \gamma_1\gamma_2}} {\rm exp}\left[-\left(\frac{(x-0.1)^2}{2 \gamma_1^2} + \frac{(y-0.1)^2}{2 \gamma_2^2}\right) \right] $ 

with $\gamma_1 = 1.0\beta$, $\gamma_2 = 1.5\beta$, and $\beta=1$ (x and y are the coordinates of the proposed step if we center the coordinate system in our current position.)

construct a Metropolis-Hastings algorithm to produce $N=100,000$ samples from $F(x,y)$ with an initial position of $(x,y) = (5,-5)$. Plot the results.

### Part B:

We want to experiment with $\beta$ by running your code with $\beta$ in the range 0.1 to 40 (think about the appropriate order of magnitude of the $\beta$ spacing). 

1. Plot the accepted sample histories for each $\beta$. What is the acceptance rate for each $\beta$? 
2. Explain your results and select the "best" value of $\beta$?

### Part C:

Choose a symmetric proposal and construct a Metropolis algorithm to product $N=100,000$ samples from $F(x,y)$ with an initial position of $(x,y) = (5,-5)$. Plot the results.  How do the results compare to those from Metropolis-Hastings in **Parts A & B**?  



```python

```

